# The Unix Programming Environment

An operating system in the main software that your computer runs on, like
Windows, Macos, or Linux.

The Unix programming environment is a set of similar operating systems which
are commonly used for software development.  Its development began about fifty
years ago at Bell Labs, and it is still the foundation of most modern
development workflows.  This section will introduce you to the environment, and
show you how to do some useful things.

## The Unix Philosophy

First, let's discuss the "Unix Philosophy".  Below is a set of four points
which outline the design principles of unix operating systems, and software
development in general.

1. Make each program do one thing well. To do a new job, build afresh rather
than complicate old programs by adding new "features".
2. Expect the output of every program to become the input to another, as yet
unknown, program. Don't clutter output with extraneous information. Avoid
stringently columnar or binary input formats. Don't insist on interactive
input.
3. Design and build software, even operating systems, to be tried early,
ideally within weeks. Don't hesitate to throw away the clumsy parts and rebuild
them.
4. Use tools in preference to unskilled help to lighten a programming task,
even if you have to detour to build the tools and expect to throw some of them
out after you've finished using them.

This is commonly summarized in this more digestible format:

1. Write programs that do one thing and do it well.
2. Write programs to work together.
3. Write programs to handle text streams, because that is a universal interface

This advice is not meant to apply to all types of programs, but it will get you
far, and it will help you understand Unix.

## Operating System, Terminal, Shell

First, let's clarify some terminology.

An **Operating System** is software on your computer that *other* software runs
on top of.  The operating system has special control over other programs, which
is necessary for security and organization.  For example, suppose there is some
malicious or bugged piece of software on your computer.  A good operating
system will let you 'kill' that piece of software so it does not compromise all
of your other work.  Similarly, your computer only has so much hardware
available to the good programs which must be divvied.  This is another problem
that the operating system solves.

A **Terminal** is any program running on your operating system that allows you
to read text based output from programs.

A **Shell** is any program that runs on a terminal and allows you to interact
with programs interactively via text commands.  We will focus on learning
a shell called **`bash`** but that being said, most of what we learn will
transfer directly to other shells.

From those definitions, a terminal and a shell might sounds pretty similar and
they are.  Put more simply:  The terminal and shell both live on the operating
system.  The shell is what allows you to interact with programs.  The terminal
is simply a middleman that transcribes your input from the keyboard to the
shell, and then takes the shell's output and and displays it to your monitor.

## Using a Shell

Now that we've gotten all the definitions out of the way, let's take a look
at what it actually means to use the shell.

> Interactive Demonstration

### `man`

Format and display the on-line manual pages

#### Examples

* `man man`
* `man bash`
* `man ls`

### `ls`

List all directory contents

#### Examples

* `ls`
* `ls .`
* `ls ..`
* `ls ~`

### `mkdir`

Create a directory

#### Examples

* `mkdir MyDir`


### `cd`

Change (navigate into a) directory

#### Examples

* `help cd`
* `cd MyDir`
* `cd .`
* `cd ..`
* `cd ~`
* `cd -`

### `touch`

Create file or change timestamp on existing file

#### Examples

* `ls -ld .`
* `touch .`
* `ls -ld .`
* `touch NewFile`

### `echo`

Print to standard output (your screen)

#### Examples

* `echo "hello"`

### `cat`

Concatenate and print files

#### Examples

* `cat`
* `cat data/sample.txt`

### `cp`

Copy files

#### Examples

* `cp NewFile CopiedFile`
* `cp -r Mydir CopiedDir`

### `mv`

move (or rename) files

#### Examples

* `mv NewFile SameFile`

### `rm`

Remove directory entries

#### Examples

* `rm CopiedFile`
* `rm -r CopiedDir`

### `chmod`

Change file modes (user permissions)

#### Examples

* `chmod +x hello.sh`

### Other Commands

You will likely come across other commands not mentioned here.  Remember, `man`
is your friend.  Some other common commands are:

`pwd`, `ln`, `chown`, `find`, `du`, `df`, `less`, `head`, `tail`, `grep`,
`sort`, `wc`, `diff`, `pkill`, `top`, `time`, `sudo`, `alias`

### Wildcards

`man bash` (Search for **Pathname Expansion**)

#### Examples

* `echo *`
* `ls *.md`
* `ls *.??`

### Redirection

#### Examples

* `echo "Hello, world" > hello.txt`
* `echo "Hello, you" >> hello.txt`

### Pipe

#### Examples

* `ls | sort`
* `cat roster.csv | sort`
* `cat roster.csv | sort | cut -f1`
* `cat roster.csv | sort | cut -f1 | cut -d' ' -f2`
* `cat roster.csv | sort | cut -f1 | rev | cut -d' ' -f1 | rev`
* `cat roster.csv | cut -f1 | rev | cut -d' ' -f1 | rev | sort --ignore-case`
* `cat roster.csv | cut -f1 | rev | cut -d' ' -f1 | rev | sort --ignore-case | uniq -c`
* `sort roster.csv -R | cut -f1 | head -n1`
* `sort < roster.csv | tee sorted.txt | uniq`

### Productivity Tips

* `up-arrow` lets your scroll through your history of commands.
* `ctrl+r` lets you search your history.
* `tab` autocompletes file names
* You can use `vim` or `emacs` to edit files from your terminal

## Bash Scripting

All of the previous commands can be run directly on the terminal, however they
can also be put into a "shell script."

#### Example

This is an example of a script that creates a new directory, creates a new
file in that directory, and adds content to the file.

```bash
mkdir newDir
touch newDir/newFile
echo "Here is some content." > newDir/newFile
```

Note that the file may not be "executable" by default meaning you may need be
able to run the code.  There are two ways around this.

1. Make the file executable by running `chmod +x snippets/script_0.sh` 2. Run
the file directly in your terminal with `source snippets/script_0.sh` or `.
code/bash_1.sh`

### Variables

You can store data in "variables" for later use.

#### Example

```bash
myName="Cory Nezin"
echo $myName
```

You can also store the output of commands in variables

#### Example

```bash
mydir=$(pwd)
echo $mydir
```

You can also read files into variables like this:

```
myData=$(<roster.csv)
echo $myData
```

You can concatenate variables as follows:

```bash
a="Cory"
b="Nezin"
c=$a$b
echo $c
```

When running a script, you can pass values at run time like this:

```bash
firstname=$1
lastname=$2
echo "Hello, first name: $firstname last name: $lastname"
```

## Conclusion

From this lesson, you should be a little more familiar with how to use a
terminal and a shell.  However it takes a lot of practice to become proficient,
so get out there and start working on it.
